Parents who are worried about infectious diseases regularly argue that anytime there is an outbreak of measles, flu or chicken pox at their kids’ school all of the non-vaccinated kids are the culprits, and therefore should be banished from school until they are inoculated.
But ironically, it’s the vaccinated kids who are actually the “carriers” or “shedders” of live viruses that they were recently injected with. So who, really, should we avoid?
Most of us know that anyone who has been injected with a live virus – even one that has been weakened or is “inactive” – can nevertheless shed that virus via saliva or mucus to anyone they come in contact with, whether or not they have been vaccinated.
This is even true when the vaccinated “shedder” does not contract the disease or a particular strain of influenza.
But our very own Centers for Disease Control and Prevention count on the general public not reading or utilizing information published on their own web site (and we don’t). So most Americans are clueless about the fact that the most crucial information regarding this matter is not on TV or in the newspapers. However, on page 5 of a 14-page PDF on the CDC web site, the public is nevertheless warned:
Fecal shedding of vaccine virus was evaluated in a subset of persons enrolled in the phase III trials. Vaccine virus was shed by 9% of 360 infants after dose 1, but none of 249 and 385 infants after doses 2 and 3, respectively. Shedding was observed as early as 1 day and as late as 15 days after a dose. The potential for transmission of vaccine virus was not assessed in trials. In a post-licensure evaluation in the United States, stool samples were collected from infants for 9 days following the first dose. Rotavirus antigen was detected in stool of 21% of 103 infants, as early as day 3 post vaccination and as late as day 9.
In truth, vaccinated people are still incurring weakened immunity from today’s vaccines and are therefore more susceptible to getting sick from “shedders” – the vaccinated.
Sources:
