If you’re trying to conceive or already pregnant, chances are you already know about staying on top of your prenatal checkups and fitting in plenty of healthful foods, exercise and sleep. But have you talked to your doctor the vaccinations to get before and during pregnancy? You definitely should, and here's why: Pregnancy weakens the immune system to support your growing baby (who your body considers a foreigner), which means as a moms-to-be you're at greater risk of catching something and getting sicker. Plus some vaccine-preventable diseases, like whooping cough, can be very dangerous for newborn babies. And if you’re considered high-risk or are traveling outside the US, you may need even more vaccinations. Other vaccines, however, are considered unsuitable, sometimes dangerous, for pregnancy. How can you keep all this info straight? Start by talking to your doctor. Then check out this guide to the vaccines you and your family should get before and during your pregnancy — plus those you should wait to get until after you've delivered.
Did you escape chicken pox as a child? Having avoided the calamine-soaked misery of this childhood illness may have seemed like a lucky break at the time, but now it means that you might be missing important immunity.
Having chickenpox as an adult can be quite serious. And if you’re pregnant, it’s not only uncomfortable, it could also spell serious trouble for your growing baby-to-be. Before you become pregnant, get checked by your doctor to see if you need the varicella vaccine (women who are already pregnant should not receive the vaccine). If blood work reveals that you’re not immune to chickenpox, the vaccine helps keep the pox at bay. If you have not had two doses of the chickenpox vaccine before, you’ll need two doses, four to eight weeks apart. Then, if you can, hold off on conceiving until a month after your second dose.
Measles, Mumps and Rubella (MMR)
In addition to all three of these being very uncomfortable illnesses, rubella, (aka, German measles) can cause birth defects, while a mumps infection increases miscarriage risk and measles ups the odds of preterm birth or a low-birthweight baby. What’s more, you can't get the MMR vaccine during pregnancy.
Keep in mind that if your vaccination records show that you got an MMR shot when you were younger, you are considered protected for life and don’t ever need a booster dose. However if you weren’t immunized according to the childhood schedule, you should get vaccinated and then wait one month before trying to conceive. Not sure whether you received the MMR vaccination and can’t find your vaccination records? Get the shots now, before you conceive — even if you were vaccinated, it’s perfectly safe to get an additional dose.
If you’re at high risk for this viral infection that attacks the liver (say, you’re a health-care worker and you come into contact with people’s blood and bodily fluids, which is how hepatitis B is transmitted, or if you’ve had more than one sex partner in the past six months), then you’d be wise to make sure you’re up-to-date on this vaccine. Hepatitis B can be passed on to an unborn baby, and it can lead to liver failure and liver cancer. The vaccine comes in a series of three shots, but you don’t need to finish all three doses before conceiving. It’s safe to continue with the series during pregnancy.
Influenza (a.k.a. the Flu) Vaccine
The flu vaccine helps prevent some strains of the flu, which can be very unpleasant for adults and much more serious (even deadly) to babies, small children, the elderly and anyone with a chronic medical condition or compromised immune system (including pregnant women). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that all expecting women get the flu vaccine if they’re pregnant during the cold and flu season, preferably toward the beginning of the season, which can last from October to May. Just avoid the nasal spray, which contains live flu viruses.
Got vaccinated last year? You should still get a new shot this (and every) year— because immunity wanes with time, and the flu shot is reformulated every year to incorporate whichever strains doctors think will be most prevalent.
Also be sure to get vaccinated if you're planning to get pregnant or are caring for a small child, and make sure your little one gets vaccinated, too.
Tetanus, Diptheria and Pertussis (Tdap) Vaccine 
Tetanus is an infection caused by bacteria that can enter the body through a break in the skin. A toxin made by these bacteria cause nervous-system symptoms (such as muscle spasms and seizures). Diphtheria and pertussis (also known as whooping cough) bacteria are spread through coughing and sneezing and cause severe respiratory problems. The adult vaccine is called Tdap for protection from all three: tetanus, diphtheria and whooping cough.
All women should get this shot between 27 to 36 weeks of each pregnancy (though if you're at risk for whooping cough due to an outbreak in your community or if you get a deep cut in your skin and are due for your tetanus booster, the vaccine is also safe to get earlier in pregnancy). When you get the Tdap vaccine during pregnancy, you pass on some immunity to help protect your newborn from whooping cough before he’s old enough to get his own vaccine, the first of which he’ll get at when he’s 2 months old. And that’s important, since whooping cough is highly contagious and can be deadly for young babies, whose immune systems are still developing.
You may also want to talk to your doctor about getting these vaccines during pregnancy if you meet particular risk factors, such as having a chronic illness or working or traveling in places where you may be exposed to the disease:
Hepatitis B vaccine: The hepatitis B virus also causes liver disease and is transmitted through sexual contact, body fluids or shared hypodermic needles, and it can be present in the body for many years without showing any symptoms. If you’re at high risk of hepatitis B (a health-care worker, dialysis patient, have had sex with more than one partner in the last six months or are traveling to a country where hep B is prevalent, including many countries in Africa, the Middle East, Asia and Western Europe), you should get vaccinated during pregnancy.
There are several vaccines you definitely shouldn’t get during pregnancy. While in some cases there has been no definitive evidence of problems linked to these vaccines, more research needs to be done to prove they’re safe for you and your baby — which is why doctors recommend avoiding the following vaccines while you’re pregnant.
If you’re not immunized against the chickenpox virus, you should get this vaccine before you conceive. Because the vaccine contains a live virus, it’s not safe for women who are already pregnant. Talk to your doctor before you become pregnant if you never had chickenpox as a child or were never vaccinated as a child.
If you’re exposed to the varicella virus while you’re pregnant (your nephew’s preschool class has an outbreak, say) and haven’t received the vaccine, talk to the doctor about getting the varicella-zoster immune globulin, which can offer you temporary immunity and prevent complications should you come down with a case of the pox.
Like Varicella, the MMR vaccine (which stands for Measles, Mumps and Rubella) contains live viruses, so it is not safe for women who are already pregnant. If possible, try to wait 4 weeks between receiving the vaccine and becoming pregnant.
The human papillomavirus (HPV) is responsible for most cervical cancers and genital warts, and the series of vaccines that protects against it has only been around for less than 10 years. Right now, the series of three vaccines are recommended for kids 9 or older and young adults up to age 26. But experts think more research is needed to make sure it’s safe during pregnancy. If you’re 26 or younger, you should, however, get the vaccine after your baby is born.
This shot protects people from shingles — which, like chicken pox, is caused by the varicella virus. It’s most common in those older than 50 and in people with certain medical issues. There isn’t much research on the effects of the vaccine on pregnant women, so doctors advise you get the shot (if it’s recommended for you before age 60) after you deliver.
The CDC additionally says you should not receive the following vaccines, since not enough studies have been done on pregnant women to determine whether they're safe for baby: 
Do keep in mind, however, that these vaccines are safe if you’re breastfeeding — and, if you get these shots postpartum, you’ll pass some temporary immunity on to your baby through your breast milk.
Anyone who takes care of or spends a lot of time with your baby — including grandparents, siblings, caregivers, babysitters, day-care providers — should be up-to-date on their shots, too. Make sure your partner and other relatives (and your sitter if you have one) schedule a flu vaccine, since the virus is so prevalent and the formulation changes every year. And also make sure they are up-to-date on their Tdap and Dtap vaccines, since pertussis is highly contagious, and statistics show that most babies get whooping cough from a family member.
