There are nine confirmed cases of measles among people who visited Disneyland during the week before Christmas, according to this report from KTTV in Los Angeles.
Let the hysteria begin! Or not.
Before everyone starts panicking and racing out to get vaccinated. Please take some time to learn the truth about measles, and about the MMR vaccine.
Nearly three years ago there was another “big scare” when two cases of measles were tied to people who visited the Super Bowl Village in Indianapolis. That “outbreak” resulted in near-hysteria in three states and a huge media campaign to blame parents of children who had not received the MMR vaccine. Did you hear about it? Yeah. It didn’t last long. And guess what? Nobody died.
I wrote about it at the time, and since I collected a lot of information then, I’m not going to reinvent the wheel for this “outbreak.”
Here is the article from USA Today, which was written about the Indiana outbreak. I’m sure there will be similar articles regarding the Disneyland “outbreak.”
Dr. Christenson’s statements are likely to be repeated by other doctors and by Public Health officials in California, so let’s examine what Dr. Christenson says.
“Measles can be a fatal disease.”  This is true.  It is more likely to be fatal if you happen to live in a third-world country than if you live in the United States.
The CDC has this to say about the severe complications from measles:
The statement that 1 out of 1,000 “children” who get measles will die from it is misleading. That’s because those numbers are based on the global measles problem; not measles in the United States.
When I wrote the article on the Indiana “outbreak” in 2012, there was a CDC MMWR publication I used and linked to, to show how inflated the 1/1000 number was. That publication has either been moved or taken down. I will try to find it and include it here, but for now I have to leave this information without the citation (due to limited time). In the CDC’s MMWR report on measles, it stated there are approximately 20 Million cases of measles each year worldwide and of those cases, there are approximately 197,000 deaths. This appears to be where they are getting their figure of 1 or 2 deaths per 1,000 cases.  The MMWR report also stated that about 1/2 of the deaths from measles occur in India.  So if half of the roughly 200,000 deaths from measles occurs in India, then the rest of the world splits the remaining 100,000 deaths per year. That still sounds like a lot. And SOME of them were children – not all. So the 1 in 1,000 deaths among children statement just doesn’t make sense, unless you are talking about children in third-world countries.
My friend Dawn wrote a great article called Putting Measles Into Perspective, which was published here on VaxTruth. In her article, Dawn points out that prior to the availability of the measles vaccine, which was licensed in 1963, the number of yearly measles deaths in the U.S. was approximately 450.
Here is a photo Dawn used in her article, to demonstrate a more likely estimate of the risk of U.S. citizens dying from measles:
.000237% is a very small number.  What this means is that prior to the availability of the measles vaccine in the U.S., between 2 and 3 people out of every ONE MILLION U.S. citizens died from measles complications.   Are you feeling a little better now about the “outbreak” of measles at Disneyland?  I hope so.
Dr. Christenson states:  “Measles is also preventable.  Parents should take this opportunity to make sure their children are up to date on their shots.”
The implication of Dr. Christenson’s statement is that vaccines will prevent your child from getting measles.  Is this true?
Here are a few studies that do not support Dr. Christenson’s statement:
“The phenomenon of declining vaccine efficacy may have become more pronounced in recent years because there has been less exposure to measles infection; we have found that exposure to natural measles is important in maintaining protective antibody levels among vaccinated children.”  (citation)
Clin. Invest. Med., vol. 11, no. 4, August 1988, pp. 304-9:    “Measles serodiagnosis during an outbreak in a vaccinated community” –  From a group of 30 measles-sufferers displaying IgM antibodies during the acute phase of illness, 17 had been vaccinated for measles. All 17 experienced measles again, showing IgM antibodies indicating acute infection. “A history of prior vaccination is not always associated with immunity nor with the presence of specific antibodies.” (citation)
Boulianne N, et al.(1991) [Major measles epidemic in the region of Quebec despite a 99% vaccine coverage]. Can J Public Health. 1991 May-Jun;82(3):189-90. French. PMID: 1884314; UI: 91356447. The 1989 measles outbreak in the province of Quebec has been largely attributed to an incomplete vaccination coverage. In the Quebec City area (pop. 600,000) 1,363 confirmed cases of measles did occur. A case-control study conducted to evaluate risk factors for measles allowed us to estimate vaccination coverage. It was measured in classes where cases did occur during the outbreak. This population included 8,931 students aged 5 to 19 years old. The 563 cases and a random sample of two controls per case selected in the case’s class were kept for analysis. The vaccination coverage among cases was at least 84.5%. Vaccination coverage for the total population was 99.0%. Incomplete vaccination coverage is not a valid explanation for the Quebec City measles outbreak. (citation)
Davis RM, et al.(1987) A persistent outbreak of measles despite appropriate prevention and control measures. Am J Epidemiol. 1987 Sep;126(3):438-49. PMID: 3618578; UI: 87295970. From January 4 to May 13, 1985, an outbreak of 137 cases of measles occurred in Montana and persisted for 12 generations of spread. A total of 114 cases occurred on the Blackfeet Indian reservation in northwest Montana. Of the 137 cases, 82 (59.9%) were in school-aged children (aged 5-19 years). Of the 114 cases on the reservation, 108 (94.7%) were classified as programmatically nonpreventable. A total of 64 (82.1%) of the 78 patients on the reservation who were born after 1956 and were above the recommended age at vaccination had a history of adequate measles vaccination. Additionally, an audit of immunization records at the schools in Browning, Montana, where most of the cases occurred, showed that 98.7% of students were appropriately vaccinated. A retrospective cohort study in the Browning schools failed to identify age at vaccination or time since vaccination as significant risk factors for vaccine failure. Overall vaccine efficacy was 96.9% (95% confidence interval =89.5-98.2%). None of 80 Browning students who were vaccinated at less than 12 months of age and revaccinated at 15 months of age or older became infected. A case-control study showed a significant association between attendance at Browning basketball games and infection early in the outbreak. This outbreak suggests that measles transmission may persist in some settings despite appropriate implementation of the current measles elimination strategy. (citation)
Barratta et al. (1970) investigated an outbreak of measles in Florida from Dec 1968-1969 and found there was little difference in the incidence of measles in vaccinated and unvaccinated children. (citation). Note: There is no abstract for this article on pubmed. This link provides more information.
Gustafson TL, (1987) Lievens AW, Brunell PA, Moellenberg RG, Buttery CM, Sehulster LM.    Measles outbreak in a fully immunized secondary-school population.  N Engl J Med 1987 Mar 26;316(13):771-4      An outbreak of measles occurred among adolescents in Corpus Christi, Texas, in the spring of 1985, even though vaccination requirements for school attendance had been thoroughly enforced. Serum samples from 1806 students at two secondary schools were obtained eight days after the onset of the first case. Only 4.1 percent of these students (74 of 1806) lacked detectable antibody to measles according to enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and more than 99 percent had records of vaccination with live measles vaccine. Stratified analysis showed that the number of doses of vaccine received was the most important predictor of antibody response. Ninety-five percent confidence intervals of seronegative rates were 0 to 3.3 percent for students who had received two prior doses of vaccine, as compared with 3.6 to 6.8 percent for students who had received only a single dose. After the survey, none of the 1732 seropositive students contracted measles. Fourteen of 74 seronegative students, all of whom had been vaccinated, contracted measles. In addition, three seronegative students seroconverted without experiencing any symptoms. We conclude that outbreaks of measles can occur in secondary schools, even when more than 99 percent of the students have been vaccinated and more than 95 percent are immune. (citation)
MMWR Measles in an Immunized School-Aged Population — New Mexico Vol 34, No 04;052 02/01/1985. The school system reported that 98% of students were vaccinated against measles before the outbreak began..  (citation)
So, you probably get the picture by now.  If you want to see more studies documenting vaccine failure for measles, I suggest you go here.
Let’s break this one down.
“…there is no evidence that this vaccine causes autism or other chronic adverse conditions.”
First, let me say that I personally believe Andrew Wakefield’s report, in which he stated there “may be” an association between MMR, gastrointestinal disease and autism was correct.  If you believe that makes everything I say suspect, then there is probably very little I can do to convince you otherwise.  Did you know Dr. Wakefield’s research has been replicated? It has. In at least 28 studies in multiple different countries.  I know his observations have been replicated because even those who are trying to refute his findings have replicated them.  See my article, Only 5 of 25 if you doubt the veracity of this statement.
Here are a few other studies that have reported an association between autism and MMR vaccine:
Regardless of what you believe about the MMR/Autism debate, Dr. Christenson has stated (as others no doubt will also state) that there is no evidence of other chronic adverse conditions.  Is THIS part of his statement true?
Here are a few articles from the peer-reviewed medical literature, documenting some of the “other chronic adverse conditions” from MMR vaccination:
 Neurological disorders:
Thank-you to Think-Twice, Global Vaccine Institute for compiling much of the information above.
Of course, if you don’t want to weed through all of the above studies to find out if the MMR vaccine can cause long-term, serious, chronic conditions, you could just ask the mother of this child:
Final word:
The last part of of the statement that needs to be addressed does not appear to be from Dr. Christenson; rather, it appears to come from the author of the USA Today article.  It is the assertion that MMR Vaccine is “usually needed” for school attendance.
It’s not… unless you happen to live in West Virginia or Mississippi.
To find out about vaccine exemptions in your state, please click this link.
I have been accused of censorship because I did not publish all of the comments from Adam McLean. Adam was commenting on both this article and the article “Putting Measles in Perspective,” which was written by Dawn Papple for her blog, and was reposted on VaxTruth with her permission.
It does bother me to be accused of censorship. However, as I explained to Adam, I am just one person and I do not have time to respond to all of his comments, and I do not feel comfortable leaving them unaddressed. So I am going to respond here to his most recent comment. I have also done so under Dawn’s article.
For reference:  This is the one comment (out of eleven) from Adam that I did publish. The others were similar.
Adam McLean January 11, 2015 at 6:44 am (Edit)
Good grief; listen to your doctor. Listen to the tens of thousands of medical researchers, and millions of doctors around the world that dedicate their lives trying to save other lives, and fully support vaccination. Don’t become a story like these:
and many, many more – all completely preventable with the measles vaccine.
Now, to Adam’s most recent protest, and my responses [in brackets]:
“Marcella: I’m very confused. If you read my comments before deleting them, you know just as well as I do that not one of them contained a single link to Paul Offit or CHOP. I don’t know if you still have access to the text, but I do have copies of each that I could repost if you are willing to allow that.
[My response: Please refer to Adam’s comment above and to the links he provided, the first of which is to CHOP.]
Back to Adam:
Here is a brief summary of each post that I made, first to this article ‘Putting Measles into Perspective’ (5 posts):
-I posted a message pointing out the main severe complication of measles is pneumonia, which is why people don’t often think of measles itself being fatal
-I posted that measles can be particular bad for pregnant women due to complications involving premature labor, spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, and low-birthweight infants
 [Which is why it is much more preferable for children to get measles naturally, as most did in early childhood prior to the mass vaccination program. This gave them long-lasting immunity, possibly life-long, and protected women throughout their pregnancies and also provided immunity to offspring during the first year of life. The vaccine often fails, with primary vaccine failure – giving no protection, and secondary vaccine failure – waning immunity after 5-25 years, leaving women with a false sense of security and zero protection when they need it most.]
-I posted the list of links to stories of people whose lives were affected (and sometimes ended) by measles, which you did post
The remainder of my comments were posted to your article ‘Measles at DIsneyland!’ (5 posts):
 -I pointed out that from 2000-2010, there were 8 deaths from measles in the US out of 777 cases, so an average risk of about 1 in 100 for those that actually catch measles.
 [What you don’t say is that at least some of those cases of measles are the result of the vaccine (vaccine-strain measles has been identified in several cases and horizontal transmission (aka “shedding”) does occur, particularly among people who are immune compromised, which may be why the death rate would be higher. The increase in measles cases over the last several years was predicted by scientists at the time of the development and mass use of the vaccine, due to concerns about both primary and secondary vaccine-failure. What we are seeing can be expected to continue and increase – not due to unvaccinated children, but as a result of the vaccine program.]
-Another comment asked to compare the risk of being struck by lightning and dying in a car accident to that of dying from measles; I posted the figures and references for each.
 [I don’t know how to respond to that because it seems irrelevant.]
-I made a post arguing that the risk of dying once someone actually caught measles (1 in 100 based on recent data) was a much more significant figure than the figure you calculate in your article, i.e., the risk of death from measles for any US citizen.
-I posted that the risk of death of 1 in 1000 prior to the vaccine in 1963 was accurate based on reported cases, but that the common assumption was that many cases were not reported prior to the vaccine being available.
 [With 3-4 million cases of measles per year (U.S.) and an average death rate of 450 per year in the U.S., the 1/1000 figure is complete bullshit. Again, using third-world stats to fear-monger does not deserve a response.]
-I posted that while measles-related deaths in the US were going away prior to the vaccine (primarily due to improved treatment of pneumonia), measles cases were not decreasing until the vaccine was introduced in 1963 (and the number of cases dropped by 20X, and deaths by a further 10X). These data were omitted from Figure 1 in the article.
 [There is no “Figure 1″ in the article. If you are referring to Dawn’s article, that is something you should take up with her. As I told you and as is clearly stated, she does not write for VaxTruth and her article was reposted here with permission. If you contact her and receive a response, I would be happy to post that in the comments on this site.
 My own response to your comment is, “Why are we trying to prevent measles in the first place, since it is not a serious infection in children (when it occurs naturally and for a very important reason)? As my more recent article “Measles is GOOD for YOU? conveys, the attempt at wiping out measles and other mild childhood infections was misguided and it now appears that the artificial manipulation and tamping down of the natural immune system, may be a contributing factor to the higher incidences of childhood cancers. Given that measles (and mumps) infections are protective against cancer, and given that the MMR vaccine has been shown to alter DNA in recipients via homologous recombinant DNA from aborted fetal cell lines, and given that childhood cancers are associated with alterations in DNA in early childhood, why would we want to continue this insane practice?]
I reiterate, none of these posts included any link or mention of Paul Offit or CHOP in any way.
I would just like to share this video that I found on the Daily Paul website, (which is Ron Paul’s website for those who didn’t know)  : )   All this fear and propaganda regarding measles is driving me insane!
 First, a little background on why I’m even here. We have 3 children, the first being fully vaccinated, the second we stopped at 4 months, the third has zero vaccinations. What is strange in our case, is that our first born (the fully vaccinated one), is sick ALL the time with so many allergies, to so many things, we’ve  lost count. We actually took her to an allergist and he showed us her chart from the test results and everything lit up like a Christmas tree, meaning, she is supposedly allergic to EVERYTHING. We said, “Well Doc, does that mean she needs to be in a plastic bubble her whole life?” She doesn’t, but she still has to avoid certain foods.
  Our second, is the second most sick in the family, with frequent illnesses (not any many as the first born), but, none the less, she is sick quite frequently.
 The strangest thing of all is found in our third born, his immune system is SO strong, he hasn’t even had a bout with flu and he is 9 years old! He gets the occasional sniffles, but that’s about it! Actually, one time when we were camping in Yosemite he kept drinking the creek water (even though we told him not to, of course) and he wound up with diarrhea and vomiting for one night, but he was completely better by the time the sun came up and was running around in no time.
 Our oldest is fully vaccinated because I was a young mother and was petrified by her pediatrician and his scare tactics. She had a SEVERE allergic reaction to her 4 month vaccines and we had to rush her to the E.R because her legs swelled to triple their size, she had a temperature of 103, she had SEVERE labored breathing, she  wouldn’t nurse or take water; it was THE SCARIEST time in our lives!!! Even when I recount it today, I still cant help but cry and shake; we thought FOR SURE we would lose her. We still listened to our Dr. because he said that happens in rare cases, but that we should continue to vaccinate because the disease is FAR worse than the reaction. So, scared once again, we continued to vaccinate. We had NO clue there was an Adverse Reaction Dept. set up for vaccines, our Dr. didn’t report it or inform us of such a dept.
 When our second child was born we still had no clue and we listened to our Dr.,  and once again, at that 4 month visit, within 30 minutes, we knew something was terribly wrong once again, and  we were back in the E.R because of the exact same reaction as the first born. It was then that  I started doing my homework, and found alternative research that backs what I had been feeling all along; children CAN get life threatening reactions to vaccines. To date, I am very upset that there are no safety studies for children’s’ immunizations, e.g., if a child may have a potential life threaten allergy to certain vaccines, etc.
 Anyway, this video below shows how America USED to react to childhood measles BEFORE the advent of the measles vaccine:
